Builders - Templates (#30)
moondance-labs/tanssi-docs: builders/build/templates.md

---

# Templates {: #templates } 

## Introduction {: #introduction }

ContainerChains deployed through Tanssi are essentially parachains within the Polkadot ecosystem that are capable of interacting with the relay chain and other parachains. They also contain the necessary functionalities to support the Tanssi protocol.

As presented in the [Included Templates](/learn/tanssi/included-templates#baseline-appchain-template){target=_blank} from the Learn section, Tanssi already provides two templates to jumpstart the development process:

- **[Baseline Appchain template](/learn/tanssi/included-templates/#baseline-appchain-template){target=_blank}** - a template that provides the basic platform to start adding custom logic in a Substrate based Appchain
- **[Baseline EVM (Ethereum Virtual Machine) Template](/learn/tanssi/included-templates/#baseline-evm-template){target=_blank}** - a template that provides full Ethereum compatibility

In this article, the required base setup and how to use the templates as a starting point to start building your Appchain are presented.

> ## Base Setup - Integrating Into Polkadot's ecosystem {: #base-setup-integrating-into-polkadot }

Reviewer: I like this!

But it feels kind of weird saying that you need just Cumulus and that is it. Maybe fill this a bit more explaining idk something so that it just does not feel like "Put cumulus, that is it"

> ## Base Setup - Integrating Into Polkadot's ecosystem {: #base-setup-integrating-into-polkadot }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Base Setup To Connect To Polkadot {: #base-setup-to-polkadot }
```

> To integrate smoothly into the Polkadot ecosystem, the ContainerChains must implement the [Cumulus SDK](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus){target=_blank}, which manages many aspects, including: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To seamlessly integrate into the Polkadot ecosystem, ContainerChains must adopt the [Cumulus SDK](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus){target=_blank}. This SDK handles various aspects, such as:
```

- **Consensus** - Cumulus adds the necessary functionality to allow the collators to produce, gossip and validate the blocks, and coordinate with the relay chain to get notified about the block's finality 
- **[XCM](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-xcm){target=_blank}** - handles the ingestion and dispatch of incoming downward and lateral messages, allowing a ContainerChain to communicate and interoperate with the other sibling chains within the ecosystem
- **Runtime Upgrades** - a runtime upgrade in a ContainerChain must be informed to the relay chain to allow its validators to check on the blocks produced by the collators of the ContainerChains. Cumulus notifies the upgrade to the relay chain and waits the required amount of time (blocks) before enacting the change

More information about how to configure Cumulus SDK to integrate an Appchain into the Polkadot's ecosystem can be found in the [official Cumulus template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/cumulus/parachain-template).

> ## Base Setup - Supporting the Tanssi Protocol {: #base-setup-supporting-tanssi }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Base Setup to Support the Tanssi Protocol {: #base-setup-supporting-tanssi }
```

> ## Base Setup - Supporting the Tanssi Protocol {: #base-setup-supporting-tanssi }

Reviewer: If you are reclycling a lot of the content from other sections makes sense to add snippets here!

Also, invite the reader to learn more about how the block production mechanism work by linking to the learn section part or something similar

## Baseline Appchain template {: #baseline-appchain-template }

Developing a Substrate-based runtime typically involves two main steps: first, [incorporating pre-existing Substrate built-in modules](XXX){target=_blank} into the runtime, and second, [crafting new modules](XXX){target=_blank} tailored to the specific application.

Since the template already contains the necessary configuration for seamless integration into the Polkadot ecosystem and for Tanssi protocol compatibility, teams interested in constructing an innovative Appchain can use this template as a starting point to start adding their custom logic.

## Baseline EVM (Ethereum Virtual Machine) Template {: #baseline-evm-template }

For teams developing their applications on top of an EVM (Ethereum Virtual machine), this template is a foundational starting point. It contains all the essential references to add the extra layer of Ethereum compatibility to a Substrate node: 

- **EVM** - this referece adds the execution layer for Ethereum apps
- **Ethereum** - this reference adds the Ethereum block production emulation to allow the RPC nodes (and DApps) to run without any modification

> - **EVMChainId** - stores the chain identifier that identifies the Ethereum network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **EVM Chain ID** - stores the chain identifier that identifies the Ethereum network
```

Reviewer: Unless this is the name of the module. But if it is I would add that before the "Substrate node"

INstea dof "essential references I would put essencial modules"

Author: Yes, those are pallets. Added modules instead of references and also backticks

> Since the template already contains the necessary configuration for seamless integration into the Polkadot ecosystem and for Tanssi protocol compatibility, if the use case is entirely developed on top of the EVM, then this template requires no additional changes in the runtime. This means that this template is ready to be built and deployed through Tanssi.

Reviewer: It would be great to create a bullet list of the things you can do out of the box and slowly add links to our documentation. For example:

"
With this template, out of the box, you can:

- Use Tanssi's block production as a service
- Use Polkadot's finality gadget (however this sounds better)
- Connect Ethereum Wallets like Metamask and Ledger
- Use well known Ethereum libraries like Ethers.js, Web3.js, Web3.py and more
- Deploy EVM Smart Contracts with tools like Remix, Hardhat, Foundry and more
- Use the Polkadot.js SDK to interact with the Substrate API
- Think about other things? 
"

Author: (We could probably add "Interoperate with other chains in the ecosystem through XCM", but it would involve opening the channels and it would not be available from the start)

## Adapting an Existing Runtime {: #adapting-existing-runtime }

For teams who already have a Substrate runtime built, it will be necessary to implement the required modules and configurations into the runtime. This will ensure that the runtime can evolve into a ContainerChain that can be successfully [deployed through Tanssi](#base-setup-supporting-tanssi) and [run properly within Polkadot](#base-setup-integrating-into-polkadot).

Failing to do so might lead to reduced interoperability within the ecosystem and unnecessary exposure to vulnerabilities.

### Adding Cumulus Support {: #adding-cumulus-support }

If the runtime is set up as a solo-chain, check on the official [Cumulus template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/cumulus/parachain-template){target=_blank} or on any of the templates available in the [Tanssi repository](https://github.com/moondance-labs/tanssi){target=_blank} for a reference setup.

### Adding Tanssi Protocol Support {: #adding-tanssi-support }

To support the Tanssi protocol, it will be necessary to add [the modules](#base-setup-supporting-tanssi) through the following steps:

> 1. Include the dependencies in the `Cargo.toml` manifesto

Reviewer: Where is the manifesto located?

Author: haha, I thought about it, and left it without mention because I don't know the structure of their project.
I´ll add something like ¨wich is usually located at ....¨
